do you remember when you first realize
that your computer was more than just a
monitor and keyboard that between the
mouse click and the video playing there
was something that captured your
intention understood it and made it real
what is that something is it gremlins
let's imagine that we can shrink down to
the size of an electron and inject
ourselves into a click of a mouse if you
took your mouse apart you'd see that
it's really a very simple machine it has
a couple buttons and a system for
detecting motion and distance you might
have an optical mouse that makes these
measurements with lights and sensors but
older ones did this with a hard rubber
ball and some plastic wheels same
concept when you click the button on
your mouse it sends a message to the
computer with information about its
position when your mouse click is
received it's handled by the basic
input/output subsystem this subsystem
acts like the eyes and ears and mouth
and hands of the computer basically it
provides a way for the computer to
interact with its environment but it
also acts like a buffer to keep the CPU
from being overwhelmed by distractions
in this case the i/o subsystem decides
that your mouse click is pretty
important so it generates an interrupt
to the CPU hey CB you got it click here
the CPU or central processing unit is
the brains of the whole computer just
like your brain doesn't take up your
whole body the CPU doesn't take up the
whole computer but it runs the show all
the same and the CPUs job its whole job
is fetching instructions from memory and
executing them so while you're typing
typing typing may be really fast like 60
words a minute the CPU is fetching and
executing billions of instructions a
second yes billions every second
instructions to move your mouse around
on the screen to run that clock widget
on your desktop play your internet radio
manage the files you're editing on the
hard drive and much much more your
computer's CPU is one heck of a
multitasker but oh my gosh there's a
very important mouse click coming
through now let's drop everything now
and deal with that there are programs
for everything that the CPU does a
special program for the mouse for the
clock widget for the internet radio and
for dealing with letters sent by the
keyboard
each program was initially written by a
human in a human readable programming
language like Java C++ or Python but
human programs
pick up a lot of space and contain a lot
of unnecessary information to a computer
so they're compiled and made smaller and
stored in bits of ones and zeros in
memory the CPU realizes that it needs
instructions for how to deal with this
mouse click so it looks up the address
for the mouse program and sends a
request to the memory subsystem for
instructions stored there
each instruction in the mouse device
driver is duly fetched and executed and
that's not nearly the end of the story
because the CPU learns that the mouse
was clicked when the cursor was over a
picture of a button on the monitor
screen and so the CPU asks memory for
the monitor program to find out what
that button is and then the CPU has to
ask memory for the program for the
button which means that the CPU needs
the monitor program again to show the
video associated with the button and so
it goes and let's just say that there
are a lot of programs involved before
you even see the button on the screen
light up when you clicked it so just the
simple task of clicking your mouse means
visiting all of the critical components
of your computer's architecture
peripherals the basic input/output
system the CPU programs and memory and
not one gremlin
you